---
title: Installing on Debian and Ubuntu
project: riak
version: 0.10.0+
document: tutorial
audience: beginner
keywords: [tutorial, installing, debian, ubuntu, linux]
prev: "[[Installing Erlang]]"
up:   "[[Installing and Upgrading]]"
next: "[[Installing on RHEL and CentOS]]"
download:
  key: debian
  name: "Debian or Ubuntu"
moved: {
    '1.4.0-': '/tutorials/installation/Installing-on-Debian-and-Ubuntu'
}
---

Riak can be installed on Debian- or Ubuntu-based systems with a binary
package or by [[compiling Riak from source code|Installing Riak from
Source]]. The following steps have been tested to work with Riak on
**Debian version 6.05** and **Ubuntu version 14.04**.

## Installing with apt

For versions of Riak prior to 2.0, Basho used a self-hosted
[apt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Packaging_Tool) repository
for Debian and Ubuntu packages. For versions 2.0 and later, Basho has
moved those packages to the [packagecloud.io](https://packagecloud.io/)
hosting service.

For the simplest installation process on LTS (Long-Term Support)
releases, use `apt-get`.

First, you must retrieve the signing key:

```curl
curl https://packagecloud.io/gpg.key | sudo apt-key add -
```

Second, you must install the `apt-transport-https` package in order to
be able to fetch packages over HTTPS:

```bash
sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https
```

With HTTPS enabled, we recommend adding the desired Riak package to your
`.list` file. packagecloud can autogenerate such a file on the basis of
your hostname and desired operating system and distribution. The
following example script would store your hostname in the variable
`HOSTNAME`, send that information to packagecloud to autogenerate a
`.list` file, and then store the return value in a file called
`basho.list`, which is stored in the `/etc/apt/sources.list.d`
directory. This example script is specific to the Precise Ubuntu
distribution:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

HOSTNAME=`hostname -f`
FILENAME=/etc/apt/sources/list.d/basho.list
OS=ubuntu
DIST=precise
PACKAGE_CLOUD_RIAK_DIR=https://packagecloud.io/install/repositories/basho/riak
curl "${PACKAGE_CLOUD_RIAK_DIR}/config_file.list?os=${OS}?dist=${DIST}$name=${HOSTNAME}" > $FILENAME
```

The resulting file should hold contents like the following:

```
# this file was generated by packagecloud.io for
# the repository at https://packagecloud.io/basho/riak

deb https://packagecloud.io/basho/riak/ubuntu/ precise main
deb-src https://packagecloud.io/basho/riak/ubuntu/ precise main
```

With your `basho.list` file populated, you can update your apt sources
list:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
```

Now install the `riak` package.

```bash
sudo apt-get install riak
```

That should be all.

## Installing From Package

If you wish to install the deb packages by hand follow these
instructions.

### Installing on Non-LTS Ubuntu Releases

Typically we only package Riak for LTS releases to keep our build and
testing matrix focused.  In some cases such as Ubuntu 11.04 (Natty),
there are changes that affect how Riak is packaged so we will release a
separate package for that non-LTS release.  In most other cases though,
if you are running a non-LTS release (such as 12.10) it is safe to
follow the below instructions for the LTS release prior to your release.
In the case of Ubuntu 12.10, follow the installation instructions for
Ubuntu 12.04.

### PAM Library Requirement for Ubuntu

One dependency that may be missing on your machine is the `libpam0g-dev`
package used for Pluggable Authentication Module (PAM) authentication,
associated with [[Riak security|Authentication and Authorization]].

To install:

```bash
sudo apt-get install libpam0g-dev
```

### SSL Library Requirement for Ubuntu

Riak currently requires libssl version 0.9.8 on some versions of Ubuntu.
Starting at Ubuntu 12.04 this is no longer an issue. Before installing
Riak via package on Ubuntu, install the `libssl0.9.8` package. Note that
this version of libssl can be safely installed alongside
current/existing libssl installations.

To install the libssl version 0.9.8 package, execute the following
command:

```bash
sudo apt-get install libssl0.9.8
```

After the libssl package installation, proceed to installing Riak from
the pre-built package by executing the following commands as appropriate
for the target platform:

### Riak 64-bit Installation

#### Ubuntu Lucid Lynx (10.04)

```bash
wget http://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.basho.com/riak/{{V.V}}/{{VERSION}}/ubuntu/lucid/riak_{{VERSION}}-1_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i riak_{{VERSION}}-1_amd64.deb
```

#### Ubuntu Natty Narwhal (11.04)

```bash
wget http://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.basho.com/riak/{{V.V}}/{{VERSION}}/ubuntu/natty/riak_{{VERSION}}-1_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i riak_{{VERSION}}-1_amd64.deb
```

#### Ubuntu Precise Pangolin (12.04)

```bash
wget http://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.basho.com/riak/{{V.V}}/{{VERSION}}/ubuntu/precise/riak_{{VERSION}}-1_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i riak_{{VERSION}}-1_amd64.deb
```

## Installing Riak From Source

First, install Riak dependencies using apt:

```bash
sudo apt-get install build-essential libc6-dev-i386 git
```

Riak requires [Erlang](http://www.erlang.org/) R15B01. *Note: don't use
Erlang version R15B02 or R15B03, for the moment, as it causes an [error
with riak-admin status](https://github.com/basho/riak/issues/227)
commands*.  If Erlang is not already installed, install it before
continuing (see: [[Installing Erlang]] for more information).

With Erlang installed, proceed to downloading and installing Riak:

```bash
wget http://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.basho.com/riak/{{V.V}}/{{VERSION}}/riak-{{VERSION}}.tar.gz
tar zxvf riak-{{VERSION}}.tar.gz
cd riak-{{VERSION}}
make rel
```

If the build was successful, a fresh build of Riak will exist in the
`rel/riak` directory.

## Next Steps?

Now that Riak is installed, check out the following resources:

- [[Post Installation Notes|Post Installation]]: for checking Riak health after installation
- [[Five Minute Install]]:
    a guide that will show you how to go from one node to bigger than
    Google!
