h1. HTTP Fetch Luwak Object

Fetches a large object from Luwak.

<div class="info">This feature is deprecated for Riak versions 1.1+.</div>

h2. Request

```bash
GET /luwak/key
```

Important headers:

* @Range@ - request a portion of the object, i.e. a range of bytes

h2. Response

Normal response codes:

* @200 OK@
* @206 Partial Content@

Typical error codes:

* @400 Bad Request@
* @404 Not Found@ - the object could not be found
* @416 Requested Range Not Satisfiable@
* @503 Service Unavailable@ - the request timed out internally

Important headers:

* @Content-Type@ - the media type/format
* @Last-Modified@ - a timestamp for when the object was last written, in HTTP datetime format
* @X-Riak-Meta-*@ any additional user metadata headers that are stored with the object.

The body of the response will be the contents of the file.

h2. Simple Example

```bash
$ curl -i http://localhost:8098/luwak/key
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
X-Riak-Meta-Test: test
Vary: Accept-Encoding
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Server: MochiWeb/1.1 WebMachine/1.9.0 (participate in the frantic)
Last-Modified: Mon, 11 Oct 2010 06:25:09 GMT
Date: Fri, 30 Sep 2011 15:24:35 GMT
Content-Type: application/json

Hello World
```

h2. Range Example

```bash
$ curl -v http://localhost:8098/luwak/key -H "Range: bytes=0-5"
* About to connect() to localhost port 8098 (#0)
*   Trying ::1... Connection refused
*   Trying fe80::1... Connection refused
*   Trying 127.0.0.1... connected
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 8098 (#0)
> GET /luwak/key HTTP/1.1
> User-Agent: curl/7.19.7 (universal-apple-darwin10.0) libcurl/7.19.7 OpenSSL/0.9.8l zlib/1.2.3
> Host: localhost:8098
> Accept: */*
> Range: bytes=0-5
> 
< HTTP/1.1 206 Partial Content
< Vary: Accept-Encoding
< Transfer-Encoding: chunked
< Server: MochiWeb/1.1 WebMachine/1.9.0 (participate in the frantic)
< Last-Modified: Thu, 12 May 2011 20:58:49 GMT
< Date: Fri, 30 Sep 2011 15:24:35 GMT
< Content-Type: text/plain
< Content-Range: bytes 0-5/11
< Accept-Ranges: bytes
< 
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
* Closing connection #0
Hello
```
